Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs, and
today I'm here with the return guest, Doctor Alexander
Rosenberg, and we're talking about his latest book, Blunt
Instrument, Why Economic Theory Can't Get Any Better, Why
We Need It Anyway, and that is the nice
book cover. So Doctor
Rosen instrument, you can see it on the cover.
Yes, it certainly is so, Doctor Rosenberg, thank you
so much for coming again on the show. It's
always a pleasure to talk with you.
And with you, Ricardo.
So I mean, let me first ask you, why
do you think we need to know about economic
theory?
So it's not that we need to know about
economic theory in general it's that. The people who
consume economic theory professionally, um, policy planners, legislators, um,
uh, those who are involved with the public institutions
of our society need to understand the, Uh, the
way in which these institutions interact with individual rational
egoists, uh, uh, those among us who are always
looking out for number one, ready to cut corners,
take shortcuts, take risks, and otherwise game the system.
There are a few people in society that do
this continually and at um uh a considerable cost
to the rest of society. There are some people
in our society who never do this, and most
of us do it some of the time. So,
um uh it's at least one portion of economic
theory that is absolutely indispensable to designing social institutions
in such a way as to save our civilization.
And that's the part of economic theory called game
theory, the most badly named. Um, Uh, DISCIPLINE in
the social sciences because it's not about games, it's
about strategic interaction, and everybody always is engaged in
strategic interaction with other people.
So we're going to talk about game theory later,
but I mean, I've heard people discussing this many
times, but is economics a science?
Well, uh, insofar as it, uh, aims to explain
and predict human behavior, um, it at least, um,
endorses the demands made on sciences, um. Uh, WITH
regard to their methods and their, uh, approach, but
unfortunately, as we've seen over the last 250 years,
economics is very bad at predicting, and therefore we
have no idea whether any of its explanations do
anything more than simply reduce human feelings of curiosity.
Um, AND for those two reasons, it's hard to
identify economics as an empirical science, despite the Nobel
Prize that the Swedish central bank has erected in
order to give it the prestige associated with the
other sciences, and certainly also despite the relatively sophisticated
appearance of mathematics that it um bears by comparison
to the other social sciences. So, the short answer
is, in my opinion, it's not a science. It's
a tool that we use for coping with one
another's behavior, and it's a pretty blunt tool, one
that has been unimprovable in at least 150 years
since it took its current form in the work
of the marginalist economists among whom John Stuart Mill
was the most important.
And that's the title of the book, right?
Yes, well, it's a blunt instrument, and it hasn't
gotten any better and it can't get any better.
Mhm. So, and explain why, because this is something
you talk about in your book, why economics is
a theory drive theory driven, sorry, and not data-driven,
and is that a problem or
not? Well, it's theory driven because the economist, uh,
pursues a research program that involves, um, uh, elaborating
on. Uh, uh, RATIONAL choice theory and its implications
in, uh, particular initial boundary conditions, um, and the
method of choice is the thought experiment. There are
relatively few cases where the economic theorist is actually
confronting, Ah, data and the revising theory in the
light of data. I need to say, um, when
I use the word economist here, I'm being, ah,
a little loose. I'm talking about economic theory. There
are many important, uh, components of economics, subdisciplines of
economics that are entirely empirical in their character, um,
and their. Some of the greatest work by economic
economists in the last several decades has involved empirical
work. So for example, the Nobel Prize was given
to 2 economists, 3 economists about 3 years ago
for, Contriving natural experiments, brilliant natural experiments that shed
tremendous light on the inadequacies of conventional economic theory,
for example, the claims about the impact of of
minimum wage laws on supply and demand of labor.
So what I'm talking about is, as the subtitle
says, economic theory, not economics as a whole, macroecon
um excuse me, econometrics, um. Uh, uh, uh, ECONOMIC
statistics, um, these are important areas of research which
shed real light on phenomena. It's economic theory. Particularly
economic models of the sort we learn in 1st
and 2nd courses in microeconomics, and now in macroeconomics,
since there's no such thing really as macroeconomics, it's
just more micro that I want to say is
a blunt and unimprovable instrument.
Let me ask you now about the idea of
homo economicus. I mean, just to be really straightforward
here, I've talked with several economists on the show
already about this idea and uh I don't remember
any of them telling me that it still makes
any sense. I remember, for example, an interview that
I did back in 2019 with the late great
Doctor Herbert Ginttis and he did with His collaborators
several experiments across different cultures and societies, and he
told me that he didn't find homo economicus anywhere.
So, uh, do you think that this idea can
make sense in any way? And if not, why
doesn't economics give it up?
So Ginters and a number of other important cognitive
social psychologists have given us excellent evidence in cross-cultural
experiments, generally using game theory, interestingly enough, or setting
up experiments using the guideline of game theory that
have demonstrated that we do not behave in the
way that the rational choice theory models suggest humans
behave, and that's probably a very good thing in
the long run for all of us, um. Uh.
The question therefore is why does economic theory continue
to employ rational choice theory that is homo economicus,
and of course the reason is that it's required
in order for the econo economic theorists to build
the proof of the Pareto optimum. Of a general
equilibrium in competitive exchange, the first theorem of welfare
economics, has nothing to do with welfare, it has
to do with, um, maximizing human preferences, tells us
that the perfectly competitive market is always one that
reaches a general equilibrium that is parade. Optimum, and
that is a guide that is used by economic
theorists in prescribing and advising on the way in
which the real economy, real markets should be revised
in order to more closely approach perfectly competitive ones,
since those are the ones for whom, for which
we have the proof of Pareto optimality. To get
this proof, they need rational choice theory, and that's
why rational choice theory continues to be central to
all of economic theory, and the imperviousness of economic
theory to behavioral economics over the past 30 years
since people like Kahnman and Tversky began to, To
expand its uh uh uh illumination on actual human
behavior and since Richard Thaler began to try to
find some way in which it might penetrate economics,
the imperviousness of economic theory to behavioral economics is
another reflection of the indispensability. To their aim of.
Keeping this theorem as the watchword of institution design,
um, of rational choice theory, homo economicus.
Why isn't macroeconomic theory sensitive to even the biggest
economic upheavals? I mean, we've gone through so many
economic upheavals. Why is it that macroeconomic theory seems
to not be sensitive to that?
So it was, uh, or at least it aimed
to be during the period after its invention in
the 1930s by, uh, Frisch and Tinbergen, on the
mathematical side and Keynes conceptually. And over the period
until the 1970s it devoted itself to understanding the
actual character of the business cycle and the causes
of recessions and depressions as well as runaway inflations.
But then it became a cropper on the stagflation
of the 1970s, and economists, interestingly enough, instead of
responding to the, Crisis that arose for macroeconomics by
trying to improve on the theory and figure out
how revisions might enable it more adequately to cope
with um stagflation, they simply turned their backs on
it and returned to classical microeconomics. And ah imposed
the demand on macro theory that it assume, assume
that markets cleared and that agents are rational, and
by doing that, it hollowed out the entire of
Keynesian economics, and converted macroeconomics into, To just another
version of microeconomics. And if you look at contemporary
models like ah dynamic, stochastic general equilibrium theories, you'll
see they start with the rational economic agent, homo
economicus.
Right, I mean, in the book you argue that
standard economic theory cannot explain the labor market nor
the financial market. Can you tell us about that?
I mean, can you explain that point you make
in the book? Interestingly enough, these are the two
most important markets for working stiffs like you and
me. A working stiff as a person who earns
their money and saves for their retirement, um, and
these two markets are the most important for us
because the labor market is the only market in
on which we are all, almost all of us
sellers and not buyers. Every other market we are
buyers and deal with, uh, imperfect competition, uh, monopoly
of various kinds. On the labor market, we are
all sellers and deal with monopsony and, um, various,
um, versions of monopsony. Ah, as such, um, the
employer is always in a position to rent seek
because there are a small number of employers and
a large number of employees, and the employers are
easily able to solve their collective action problem of
setting up, um, uh, uh, Wage rates and conditions
of labor that we can't bargain to, uh, a
um, a competitive price-taking equilibrium for. We are inevitably
subject to exploitation by, um, the wage setters, by
the employers, simply because there's a small number of
them who can solve their collective action problems to
rent seek and a large number of us who
cannot solve our collective action problems to rent seek.
Interestingly, the financial market. Ah, reflects some of the
same market failures, um, and is of equal importance
because the financial market is the most important market.
For the growth of the economy as a whole.
All of us working stiffs are, uh, investors. We
are the people who provide our postponable consumption, our
savings, um, to financial institutions. There are huge numbers
of us providing savings to financial institutions in order
to secure, um, ah, ah retirement, um, support. There
are a relatively smaller number of large corporations that
need to borrow this money in order to um
uh build capital goods, whether it's highways or airplanes
or condos, um, and between the large numbers of
sellers of loanable funds, us, who can't solve our
collective action problems, and the relatively smaller number of,
Ah, lent a borrowers, the large corporations that need
quantities of money while they build things that won't
be online for years after they start building them,
between, A small number of sellers of, of uh
loanable funds and the and the slightly larger number
of buyers and the and the relatively small number
of buyers of loanable funds, there's the middlemen, the
financial institutions, the bankers, the uh mutual funds, the
insurance companies, the venture capitalists, the investment banks, and
they of course are the smallest in number, and
they, Most easily solve their collective action problems in
setting up, um, um, institutions that enable them to
cream off the top, uh, on both sides of
the transaction, both, um, Uh, uh, rent seeking in
the ways in which they accept loanable funds from
us little guys, and rent seeking in the way
that they lend the large packages that they put
together to the big guys who need the big
loans. And so these two markets are the ones
that fail the most and most pressingly, and yet
they're the two most important markets for most of
us.
OK, so earlier you referenced the fact that economic
theory seems to be very bad at uh predicting
events at prediction generally. Uh, WHY is it then
that economics still takes uh it so seriously?
Well, As I said uh before, the, the part
of the economics that's really important. Is game theory,
and game theory is all of the economic theory
that we need in order to deal with those
cases of market failure in which rent seekers find
an opportunity to rip the rest of us off.
And since the perfectly competitive market, on the one
hand, is the only completely incentive compatible market, the
perfectly competitive market, because everybody's a price. TAKER can
never um allow for the kind of rip-off rent
seeking that I'm talking about, but it doesn't exist
in reality, and therefore every market is in fact,
to some extent either small, in the case of
the gas stations in your neighborhood or large in
the case of the financial institutions that you lend
your money to engaged in rent seeking. And everybody's
disadvantage and what governments and, er, voters need to
do is identify, Revisions, reforms, changes to the institutions
that regulate the market in order to make them
more incentive compatible. Now, doing that is always an
arms race because every time we rearrange rules to
make the market um more incentive compatible, to harness
people's selfish. To produce uh uh welfare producing ends,
um, some smart lawyer or accountant figures a new
way around it. So if you look at the
history of financial regulations from Glass-Steagall to to Frank
Dodds, you'll see that every time we try to
close the barn door, somebody's figured out how to
get the horse to escape, um, ah. The function,
the, the, the need for economic theory, in particular
for, for game theory is to figure out how
to improve institutions in this never ending arms race,
um, and there are some wonderful examples um of
how to do that. Alvin Roth, the great economist
who won the Nobel Prize for his design of
kidney transplant, um, uh, networks and uh uh. Medical
school, hospital matching systems, um, he made a significant,
ah, contribution to human welfare by showing us how
economic theory, in particular game theory can be used
to, ah, fashion, to craft these kinds of incentive,
incentive compatible institutions that classical economic theory, um, has
no grip on because it, uh, uh, Is driven
by the perfectly competitive model.
OK, so I don't think this is something that
at least you address directly in your book, but
since I've had this conversation with uh economists on
the show, and on the show I've had people,
economists who are more, who lean more toward uh
capitalism, others that are more soci that are perhaps
a little bit more on the socialist. Of things
like Dr. Richard Wolff and others. But in late,
in late 2022, I had a very interesting conversation
on the show with an economist, Clara Mattei. She's
from the New School for Social Research, and she
wrote a very interesting book titled The Capital Order
where she explores the history of the. Of Italian
fascism and links it to austerity measures, that is
liberal measures in response to the uh the Great
Depression in the late 1920s, early 1930s, and one
of the things, one of the points that she
makes in the book, and I also allowed her
space to make in that interview is that. She
and other people think that we should be aware
of the fact, at least this is her point,
that, uh, economics is not ideology-free, and she thinks
it is, uh, of course, that's her position that
it is uh dominated by uh capitalist or as
some Marxist. LIKE to call it nowadays neoliberal capitalist,
uh, position. I mean by a neoliberal capitalist, uh,
approach to economics. I mean, do, do, uh, I'm,
I'm not sure if you agree with that specific
point, but with the broader point that economics is
not ideology-free. What do you make of it?
Um. I'm frequently heard to say that economic, that
that capitalism is the worst of all economic systems
except for all the others. Um AND uh there's
nothing like the 20th century to show the problems
associated with state central planning and uh other institutional
arrangements for driving a large, um, urban, uh, technologically
driven economy. um. So I'm not a particular fan
of state socialism, er, and I think by, by
and large nowadays no socialist is. I have never
heard a socialist since uh the eclipse of Clement
Attlee's government argue for the ownership of the means
of production as the solution to the problem of
um er er er plenty, um. We know what
the problems associated with the ownership of the means
of production by the state are, and what we
need, of course, is the social market, a very
strong social safety net operating under a market as
close to competitive as possible, but unfortunately we can't
get very close to competitive, and that means we
need a lot of regulation. Um, NOW, ah, Is
the economic theory that we can put our hands
on ideologically driven, um, I think a lot of
economists who have advanced our understanding of decentralized incentive
compatible institutional arrangements are very far from ideologues of
right-wing Chicago school capitalism, and I think most prominently
of Kenneth Arrow, who did more to advance the
agenda of economic theory in the 20th century than
any other economist, um. And by economic theory, I,
I mean microeconomic theory, and was very far from
being a, a shill for the capitalist system. Um,
HE was strongly committed to, for example, taking healthcare
out of the market economy, um. And I think
you can take the tools of economic theory that
are useful, um, limited though they are, and apply
them in the design of institutions of the sort
that will address the interests and needs of people
that the socialist thinks are ignored by capitalism, um,
and I'm not sure that this is a really
adequate answer to your question, um. Is rational choice
theory a matter of ideology? No, I think it's
a matter of using uh the assumption that society
is composed of Hobbes' fool and, and, ah, Hume's
knave, and ah so designing institutions as to protect
us from them, and that's not particularly ideological.
OK. So, uh, but given its track record, do
you think that we should treat the theory that
drives economic explanations as a guide to the future?
We can't. It's been a terrible guide to the
past, and so it's track record deprives of it,
of any standing as a guide to the future,
um. The only, uh, I think a reasonable source
of material to guide us in the future is
economic data and our sort of by the seat
of the pants extrapolation from it, from time to
time, um, and the more data is available and
the more artificial intelligence there is for mining that
data, the better we will be at, Uh, extrapolating
to the future from the past, but that extrapolation
needs to be heavily theory-free. In my opinion, ah,
otherwise it will simply replicate the defects of past
explanations, and I said when we began, the important
thing to see is, although economic theory looks like
in many cases, ah, that it satisfies our itch
of curiosity in retrospect when it explains past events,
whether the financial crisis, or the dot-com bubble, um,
or, um, Ah, the impact of COVID on the
supply chain, um, economic theory, ah, because it doesn't
have a strong record of predictive improvement, ah, has
no basis for claiming that any of its retrospective
explanations are any good at all at doing anything
except reducing our itch of curiosity. And itch, which
is, of course, um based on the fact that
we think of ourselves as rational, look out for
number one, maximizer.
So let's talk then more about game theory. You've
already mentioned it, but how do we get then
to game theory and what is game theory?
So as I said before, game theory, the worst
name for a serious enterprise, uh. That I can
think of is the study of strategic interactions, that
is, it's the analysis of how agents choose under
the condition that they know or believe that other
agents will be making strategic choices and that the
outcome of their choice is contingent, at least in
part on the choices that other agents make. So
for example, The monopolist can set prices wherever the
monopolist wants to, but the monopolist won't maximize revenue
unless he can figure out what the highest price
is that the consumer is willing to pay, and
if the consumers can solve their collective action problem.
Withholding purchase, they can have an impact on how
much the monopolist, um, will be willing to charge,
and so in the simplest case of, you know,
monopoly or monopsony, ah, microeconomic theory almost never, Uh,
expresses the fact that the demand curve that both
parties need to, uh, identify the shape of in
order to figure out what price they should actually
charge or what price they can reasonably be expected
to hold out for, that demand curve can never
be determined. You have never seen a real demand
curve in an economics textbook, you only see nice
downward sloping lines, and that reflects the fact that
in a price setting situation, Both parties have to
engage in experimentation to figure out what the best
price they can charge or what the highest price
they will be um uh able to accept, turns
out to be. And this kind of strategic interaction
problem between agents in a market is characteristic of
all exchanges, and game theory provides us with the
only tools, Uh, for identifying the optimal strategies in
these exchanges, so in the labor market, the optimal
strategy for, um, um, Employers is to establish a
coalition of employers that depresses wages, and the optimal
strategy for workers is to join unions and demand
wages on the basis of of union negotiation. And
if the employers can lobby state legislatures to pass
a right to work laws that give non-union workers
exactly the same advantage as union workers in in
the workplace, then they will effectively have used the
tools of game theory in order to destroy the
collective action problem solution that has been characteristic of
labor over the last 150 years.
And so in your view, you think that game
theory when compared to uh the dominant standard economic
theory, it uh can explain, predict and correct real
markets better?
Well, I'm not sure that it can predict because
of the arms race uh issue that uh every
move on the part of one strategic agent in
a uh strategic interaction will often result in changes
in the moves of other agents, and so you're
in a dynamic situation that is constantly moving along
an arms race trajectory. And that makes prediction difficult,
but at least it makes medium-term and short-term responses,
ah, sensitive to the actual situation and likely to
at least in the short run, secure the objectives
of the participants. Now, retrospectively, I think game theory
is wonderful at explaining things. There's a wonderful paper
by a uh a cultural anthropologist named Mackey in
which he uses game theory to explain foot binding
in China over 1000 years. And that explanation has
tremendous, uh, um, uh, insight, far greater than cultural
anthropology, social history, um, or Freudian psychodynamic, uh, explanations
of foot binding. Um, BUT I think, you know,
prediction is a mug's game when it comes to
the interaction of relatively small numbers of people over
lengthy periods of time. It's, Much more feasible with
large quantities of economic data and uh search engines
that enable us to identify trends.
Isn't that Chinese foot binding something that you explore
in your book, how history gets things wrong? I
mean, I, I think I remember talking with you
about that in our first interview.
That's right, and I, and it was, it was
thinking about that when we, uh, when I wrote
that book that eventually got me started on writing
this book, um, yeah, about economic theory, that and
the fact that I've been. Talking about economic theory
for a very long time in the last century,
but the economists always ignored what I had to
say, so I stopped and started doing philosophy of
biology, um, but ever since the financial crisis, people
have become much more interested in what the matter
is with economics.
So if economic theory has all of these uh
shortcomings, why can't we do without it?
Well, We can do without. Um, Microeconomic theory as
a tool for explaining and predicting uh aggregate behavior,
which means effectively we have to do without what
contemporary economists call macroeconomics because it's just disguised microeconomics.
Um, WHAT we can't do without. Of course, is
the assumption of homo economicus, rational choice theory, in
conditions of market failure where both parties to the
market exchange have a strategic interaction problem to solve,
because the only tools we have for understanding. Ah,
strategic interaction problems and designing, ah, playing fields so
that they become anywhere close to level in the
interaction between the strategic agents is given by game
theory, and by extensions of game theory. So here's
a wonderful example, um, ah, An economist won the
Nobel Prize for showing that in auctions it's much
more efficient to arrange the auctions so that the
winner, the, the buyer who bids the highest price,
only has to pay the price offered by the
2nd highest bidder. Now that is such a counterintuitive
idea, and yet the game theory. Can show you
why setting an auction up to do that as
federal bandwidth auctions for telephone bandwidth in the 20
or 30 years ago did. Only a game theorist
can show you why doing that makes the seller
of the auctioned item better off than setting up
a uh uh highest bidder wins auction. It's counterintuitive,
but it's, it's, it's wonderful.
Yeah, and related to my previous question in the
book, at a certain point, you say that the
quote, what we really need economic theory for is
institution design. Can you explain that?
Sure. So, uh, I think it was the Nobel
Prize winning economist Leonid Hurwich, who introduced the concept
of incentive compatibility. Um, AND institution design in his
own work in economics at the University of Minnesota
in the 1950s, and he had to reach the
age of 90 before finally he got the Nobel
Prize for this work, but, um, uh. Mechanism design
is the label economists give to the problem of
designing the rules of exchange and of competition that
will harness people's selfish interests to deliver the socially
desired outcome. Um, AND, ah, the socially desired outcome
is one which can only be attained by harnessing
people's incentive to be selfish and self-interested. And to
misrepresent their preferences and their expectations. So what we
need to do is design laws and rules and
practices that force people in their actual behavior to
reveal their actual preferences and their actual beliefs. That's
what incentive compatible institution design is, and it has
been an important, um, and insightful dimension of economics
ever since Hurwich first drew economists' attention to this
problem, and of course Arrow was one of those
who early saw the importance of Hurwich's insight and
together with him advanced our uh sensitivity to these
problems.
But what kinds of institutions do we need to
construct?
All right, so, uh, I mentioned Alvin Roth, a
while ago. Here's a great example. Pretty famous now.
Hospitals in the 1940s and 1950s used to want
to get the best medical students they could, and
medical students wanted to get, Their first internships at
the best hospitals they could, but each hospital being
so concerned about getting the best, and each medical
student being so concerned about getting the best, would
make time-limited offers of positions and have to decide
on the, the hospital would make time-limited offers, and
the medical student would have to decide whether to.
Accept this offer or wait for the offer they
really want that's better, OK, and as a result,
both hospitals and medical students, ah, ended up making
significantly suboptimal choices, ah, and these suboptimal choices were
bad for the hospital and bad for the medical
students. So, ah, ah, using, ah, a theorem in
game theory, ah raw. And McKelvey and I can't
remember the name of the third economist, uh, designed
the match system in which, um, the hospital ranks
its favorite candidates, uh, uh, the, uh, medical students
rank their favorite hospitals wherever, uh, 11 medical student
in one hospital. Find that they've rated one another
#1, that pair is put aside, nobody says anything
to anybody, and both the hospital and the hospitals
go to looking for their second choice, and if
somebody has ranked the hospital as their first, having
removed the number 1 candidate, we now go to
the 2 candidate and we do exactly the same
thing. And then we go all the way down
to all the candidates and all the hospitals before
anybody is told anything, and at the end of
that process, the matches are revealed, and they maximize
the chances of each medical student getting their most
preferred hospital and each hospital getting their most preferred
medical student. And the result, of course, is an
incentive compatible outcome that benefits everyone. And um what's
interesting is the hospitals had started and medical schools
had started to do this in the 19 late
1940s in a limited way, and then the game
theorists. Showed them that if they all could adopt
this scheme, all of the hospitals and all of
the medical schools in advising their interns, everybody would
end up better off. It's a beautiful example of
designing an incentive compatible institution. It was then applied
to matching kids with schools in Boston and New
York, um, during a time in which there was
huge strife regarding the school choice problem er in
a large metropolitan school districts. Uh, Roth eventually applied
a similar device to enabling kidney transplants to be
more efficiently offered to individuals before they died from
kidney failure.
OK, so I think you've already at least partly
answered my next question, but what functions do these
institutions serve then or should serve?
Well, we know, for example, that the Sherman Antitrust
and the Clayton Antitrust Acts served the purpose of
reducing the market power of monopolists and increasing the
efficiency of markets. They didn't work very well, they
were probably better than nothing. They provided incentives to
manufacturers. And um sellers and their lawyers and accountants
to find ways of getting around them, but, um,
insofar as all markets are to some extent inefficient,
all markets reveal some amount of market failure, all
markets would do well to be improved, and the
only way, the only tools for improving these markets
are the tools of game theory.
And is it possible for us to design institutions
that prevent perverse incentives?
Well, there's one institution in which perverse incentives can
never take hold, and that is the perfectly competitive
market. Unfortunately, I mean, on the perfectly competitive market,
everybody's a price taker, there's no room for stratagems,
there's no room. For price setting, there's no room
for strategic choice. Unfortunately, the perfectly competitive market is
an idealization which exists only when 5 or 6
different completely unrealistic assumptions obtained. All we can do
is try to move real markets closer to the
perfectly competitive market in the hope that by doing
so we reduce the scope for rent seeking and
ah ah for market failure, um. Will we ever
succeed? No, because as I said before, every design
that brings us closer to the perfectly competitive market
where everyone is a price taker and there's no
room for rip off rent seeking, every move in
that direction simply um. Uh, INCENTIVIZES somebody to try
to find a way around it, a shortcut, or
even to violate the rule, accepting the risk associated
with the punishment, and if the punishment isn't high
enough, then inevitably you'll get that kind of, um,
uh, rule breaking, cheating. Uh, WHAT do we do
about that? Well, um, We have to make systems
more efficient in their detection and in their punishment
of rule violation. How likely is that in the
real world? Well, with lobbyists and regulatory capture, probably
not very likely.
OK, so I have one final question then. I
mean, uh, I haven't uh written down this question
in preparation for the interview, but since I asked
you earlier about whether or not you think that
economic theory is ideology-driven, I would like to ask
you now. Because I think that this can tell
us also something about uh how economic theory can
be used and whether or not it should be,
uh, let's say neutral in ideological terms. So, uh,
Uh, I mean, I, I get that, uh, many
people, political activists, particularly both, uh, capitalist, socialists, right-wing,
left wing, many times they appeal to economics and
economic theory to make arguments in favor of their
preferred policies. I mean, do you, uh, you are
a philosopher. I guess that uh and many of
the things we talked about here today would fall
under the rubric, the rubric of epistemology because we
are interested in, in here in trying to understand
what is, uh, true or what is not true
and how we can arrive at truth, through economics,
uh, uh, about, um, proof about people's economic. Behavior
through economics, I mean, do you think that from
an epistemological perspective it is legitimate for people to
use economic theory for political lens?
All right, so I need to go back to
to our discussion of ideology. Um, WE have to
separate the motivation, uh, for someone endorsing us, uh,
a set of beliefs from the. Truth or falsity
or applicability, predictive, explanatory or otherwise of this set
of beliefs. It's very clear that there's an ideological
motivation for endorsing uh uh conventional microeconomic theory because
it looks like an excellent rational justification of laissez-faire
capitalism and for that reason it is widely endorsed
by. Uh, CAPITALISTS by the rich, by those who
benefit from, uh, the status quo, and from the
description of the status quo as the competitive market,
um, That needs to be separated from whether the
theory as such is true or false, useful or
not, and what are the domains in which it
is useful or not. Now it seems to me
that the theory is false because people aren't rational,
uh, max uh rational preference maximizer, but, uh, can
a false theory be nevertheless, Important and applicable and
a useful tool um for areas of human interest
independent of the scientific, for example, can it be
a useful tool in designing institutions, even though it's
false of reality? Well, the answer to that question
is sure, it can be um. And maybe it
should be, um, particularly if it's assumptions about human
individual motivation are at least right about some people
whose behavior can have an unfortunate impact on the
rest of us. Right, um, free riders, psychopaths, er,
uh, really selfish people, the, uh, the, those people
who pretend to be entrepreneurs, but actually have never
spent any time at the laboratory research bench inventing.
Something really new and we will leave the name
of who I'm thinking of, uh, out of our
discussion, uh, for the moment, you know, uh, investing
in PayPal at an early point in your life
is not a basis on which to accord you
special, uh, entrepreneurial genius, but in any case, um,
uh. The ideological motivation for indoctrinating everybody with standard
off the shelf microeconomic theory is very great. But
we can prescind from that ideological motivation in asking
whether there's any value to this er institution economic
theory at all, and a lot of very smart
people who have no particular ideological ax to grind
have spent their lives and labored their genius on
this subject, right, er, and it can't be, er.
Worthless hand waving or uh uh merely ideological mystification,
it's gotta be good for something, and that's what
I tried to figure out, uh, what it's good
for in this book, having spent my entire career
um. Being skeptical about economic theory, uh, I finally
found the. Uh, WHAT I think is a stable
equilibrium in thinking about its weaknesses and at the
same time, its usefulness.
Great. So I'm getting uh mindful of your time,
Doctor Rosenberg. So let's perhaps uh wrap up our
conversation here. The book is again Blunt Instrument, Why
Economic Theory Can't Get Any Better, Why We Need
It Anyway, and there is the cover again. I
really love the book, by the way, Doctor Rosenberg,
and thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show again. It's always a
really big pleasure to everyone.
So, let's do this again in 4 years when
I dream up my next book. Thanks a lot,
Ricardo. That was great.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortezus Suliliski,
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and Wisman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai,
Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio
Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior. Old
Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gelbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander
Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes
Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to
my producers is are Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.